# Git vs Git Repository Hosting

First thing I want to explain is the difference between Git and and
Git repository hosting services like GitHub and GitLab.  This is
something easily misunderstood.  Even my boss at the time when he
was a Chief Scientist didn't get the difference at first.

Git itself is just a set of tools for creating and maintaining
repositories.  These tools are free and open source software.

Git repos can exist anywhere.  On your local disk, or on a remote
machine hosted by you or someone else.

Git software doesn't provide hosting services for sharing
repositories among users.  It does define a protocol that runs on
top of existing protocols like `https` or `ssh`.  For yourself,
`ssh` can work just fine.  However, with additional users, all the
user management and authorization can get complicated quickly and is
usually handled by other software.

Sharing repos among users is where Git hosting software like GitHub
and GitLab come into play.  Unlike Git, GitHub is nearly 100%
proprietary software owned and run by Microsoft.  On the other hand,
GitLab's core software is free and open source, however, some of its
enterprise features are proprietary.

Aside from GitHub and GitLab, there are a bunch of other cloud
hosting providers of Git repos.  Some are free as in beer.  Some
are pay, depending on what features you want.  Google for git repo
hosting reviews if interested.  Almost all of my personal repos are
hosted on either GitHub or GitLab.

# Installing Git

Every Linux distro I know of will have a package for installing Git.
The package is usually just called `git`.

Git software is also available for MacOS or Microsoft Windows.

Be careful installing Git on Ubuntu though.  One time I accidentally
got the Snap version of Git and that was just a nightmare until I
figured out how to uninstall it and install the native version.

# Configuring Git

The first thing you want to do is create your user name like so:

```
$ git config --global user.name "Arnold Schwarzenegger"
$ git config --global user.email terminator@sky.net
```

This ends up creating you a `~/.gitconfig` file saving the information
there.  Feel free to edit the file directly after you create it.

# Uses for Git

I use Git for the source code I write, but also for saving notes to
myself and other text documents.

# Git Demo

I have a directory with README and a "hello, world" program in it.
I'll convert it to a Git repo with:

```
$ git init
```

This creates the Git repo files under a directory called `.git`.
Normally, you can treat this directory as a black box and just
ignore it.

Now we need to do our first commit.  We do that with:

```
$ git add .
$ git commit -m "First checkin."
```

The commit files are now saved and our commit will show up in the
commit log.  We can see the commit log with:

```
$ git log
```

If we do a `git status`, it'll show up that we have an untracked
file `hello`:

```
$ git status
On branch master
Untracked files:
  (use "git add <file>..." to include in what will be committed)
        hello
```

We can tell Git to ignore that file by creating a `.gitignore` file
and checking it in:

```
echo "hello" > .gitignore
$ git add .gitignore
$ git commit -m "Create .gitignore."
```

Now `git status` shows us no untracked files:

```
$ git status
On branch master
nothing to commit, working tree clean
```

Now let's change our "hello, world" program to "hello, galaxy".
Don't forget to update `README.md`!

Running `git status` shows we've changed the two files:

```
$ git status
On branch master
Changes not staged for commit:
  (use "git add <file>..." to update what will be committed)
  (use "git restore <file>..." to discard changes in working directory)
        modified:   README.md
        modified:   hello.c
```

So let's commit the change and look at the log:

```
$ git commit -m "Change World to Galaxy." -a
$ git log
```

Now we want to publish our repo to a remote Git server.  There can
be two reasons for this, to share our work with the world and/or to
have a remote backup.

Let's make that happen.  I'll do it on GitHub.  After creating the
`cucug-hello-example` repo in the browser, I run:

```
$ git remote add origin git@github.com:qbarnes/cucug-hello-example.git
$ git push -u origin
```

Now we can view our repo on the GitHub web site.
